Hello, this is the fifth webcast of the PBC Morning Dawn Study Group at Padma Samye Ling,
and we'll be discussing today from Veneraokhenporo Rinpoches' book "The Buddhist Path, Chapter
5", which is called "Training in Discipline, Concentration, and Wisdom". So then we'll
just begin with opening prayers, and then we'll go into the discussion. Thanks.
[Singing in Tibetan]
The supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha Padma Sambaba, which is the essential, extraordinary
view and doctrine of the early translation school. You keep light and spread by the light
of wisdom. Lord of Dharma, great temple, I pray at your lotus feet. In the palace of
the oatman, Darmadattu, the essence of all the Buddhists of the three times, the one
who shows clearly the dharmakaya of my own mind, we pray to the honor of old Ruth Guru,
glorious Ruth teacher, precious one, dwelling on the lotus seed and the crown of my head.
Hold me with your great kindness, and bestow the accomplishments of body, speech, and mind.
[Singing in Tibetan]
So this chapter five is divided into three points. The first is discipline, and the second
is concentration, and then the third, wisdom. So quickly I'll go over the ribcage, like
the overview of the chapter where they discuss the discipline. So they begin by saying that
the nature of the mind is filled with limitless goodness qualities, but to fully reveal these
qualities, the Buddha taught the three trainings of discipline, concentration, and wisdom.
And discipline is not like following orders. We're fully relating with our mind by taming
the negative limited habits of our body, speech, and mind. And this is the first step in revealing
the mind's goodness qualities. And then the best support for discipline is mindfulness,
alertness, and conscientiousness. In our daily life as well as in our practice, we have to
pay attention to what is happening if we expect to develop good results. So then we'll just
read this first topic.
According to the Buddhist teachings, discipline is not like following orders or being forced
to do something. Discipline means to relate fully with your own mind. In order to uncover
our true nature, we need to discipline our body, we need to discipline our speech, and
we need to discipline our mind. Discipline is the first stage of cleaning up and preparing
for further developments. It is like clearing the ground. If we want to erect a beautiful
building, we need to clear the surface first. That's page 27, second paragraph.
I had a question about discipline. That was the second paragraph on the page. If you look
down at the third paragraph on 27, there's one line in particular. Discipline should
be accompanied by mindfulness, careful attention, and joyful effort. I think it was either in
that paragraph or somewhere else in this chapter, they talked about how discipline is relating
fully with the mind. What's the way that discipline influences mindfulness? Because I think so
often, particularly in a lot of books that are geared towards people who are very new,
a lot of emphasis is put on mindfulness and the mindfulness practices. What is it that
the discipline brings to the mindfulness that isn't already there within mindfulness practices?
What's the way that it highlights it? It's kind of a practical question, I guess.
Maybe it has to do with how discipline, on this term sheet, it can be talked about in
terms of ethical conduct as shila, which is one definition of discipline as it's used
in these three trainings. Not only just mindfulness in general, but also really looking more at
our outer behavior. How are we interacting with others? In terms of our bodies, each
and our mind being disciplined about our conduct.
In the way of saying, rather than being mindful of robbing a bank, we're mindful of washing
the dishes. In that way, are you saying?
I think so. But also, if you don't have a virtuous conduct, your mind becomes agitated,
and therefore it's much harder to practice mindfulness. Say somebody who's like a bank
robber, they have a lot of worries and fears. So if your ethical conduct isn't in line,
then you actually have a much more difficult time, or you couldn't practice mindfulness.
Exactly. Because our mind is so much influenced by our body and our speech, that if what
we do with our body and our speech is really rough, or based on these negative emotions,
then it's going to increase the habit of our mind to be tight, have more grasping, have
these same negative emotions, be stronger. What mindfulness is doing is highlighting
in the present moment, what is my mind doing? Is it negative? Is it imbalanced or balanced?
I think a big part of mindfulness is that we see what our mind is doing in the present,
and at the same time we see if that's tending to lead us towards more suffering, and we
experience that suffering in not a pleasant way, and then also mindfulness would see if
it's tending to make our mind more balanced, and then we experience how that is more free
from suffering, or more relaxed, more attentive to the details, more available to be interacting
with what's actually happening in this situation, different things.
So you're saying mindfulness would lend itself easily to discipline that?
It seems to me that it's also a way of helping to define what is discipline.
I definitely think mindfulness is a part to be remembering our intention, remembering,
kind of looking at our motivation, our general goals, what's most appropriate with what's
actually right with us now, and always just keeping that atmosphere, that awareness of
our intention, whether it's actions of our body, actions of our speech, or just where
our mind or self is.
It seems like there's a lot that makes up discipline, and that's part of our discussion
here, is what is discipline, and definitely it seems it entails mindfulness.
And then of course mindfulness and alertness and conscientiousness kind of seems like applies
to our concentration as well, but definitely has a place with watching our body, speech,
and mind, because remembering our overall goal, and instructions, and promises, and so many.
Yeah, like Jungkong cultural, the first cultural, he wrote this giant vast treasury of knowledge,
they call it, which includes one of the whole scopes of the Buddhist teaching.
The first one, which was the root of the whole foundation and the backbone for everything
that came afterwards, and that was his intention to write, was a commentary on basically discipline
,
the three vowels, and as they say, without discipline, you can't, well you can't really
progress at all, because you have, like I was saying, like everyone else was saying,
normally we think of, I think discipline as like, I think it's helpful to think of,
in some ways, as like where do we want to go, like what direction do we want to go in,
if we want to go in like bank robber direction, then we shouldn't be disciplined
in certain ways, we should just do that, you know, we should do bank robber activities.
If we want to go in the direction of like being more gentle, less agitated, less drama,
you know, like more gratefulness, more awareness of like impermanence
and the fleeting aspect of everything, like also I think it's time to just recognizing
our present circumstances, and how lucky we are, and how special those circumstances are,
because as they say, like the Buddha said, the thought of impermanence is like a whip to the horse,
and that's like, that has to do with discipline in the sense that, here in Caesar's Echoes,
they talk about discipline that rejects negative action, but also discipline that accepts positive
action.
So it's not just like, you know, like, I'm not going to do this, here's a big list of things
I can't do or shouldn't do or won't do, because that way you could be really encumbered, you know,
but if you think of it as like, well here's where I want to go, I want to go down the Dharma path,
I want to, you know, like realize these states, and then what helps me with that, you know,
like maintaining like a calm mind, calm body, calm speech, calm mind, you know, cultivating
mindfulness,
all those things together.
And maybe going off of that as well, there's another term that Rinpoche's were tying into this,
again in that same paragraph I was referencing before, that third paragraph,
they talk about not only the careful attention, which I think we've talked about here,
but also the joyful effort, which I think for a lot of people, including myself,
the link between joyful effort and discipline isn't always very apparent, particularly at first,
so I was wondering if people would talk a little bit about the connection of how to bring joyful
effort
into discipline and mindfulness, or, you know, how it might even just naturally be within that
discipline.
Well I was just thinking about how, in that same paragraph again, this third paragraph,
just talking about discipline as good planning, and it's really just like what you were saying,
like if you think about it like, what do you do when you're going to plan an activity,
like thinking about like what you're going to need along the way, so what's your destination,
and like, if you have that pretty clearly in mind, and it's, you know, in this case it's like
following the Dharma,
then it's like, what do you put in your basket? And you joyfully pack these like good, useful
things like mindfulness,
like, you know, whatever the ingredients I need, there's so many good ingredients, positive
ingredients,
and so in a way, to me, that's sort of how it seems like joyful effort is part of discipline,
it's just like planning for a trip and you're excited and it's good, the destination's good,
and put everything useful in that basket.
Do you have time for the level of appreciation then, or more?
Yeah, I mean, in some ways, and it's just like maybe the joyfulness of maintaining the awareness of
the destination in a sense,
and so because the discipline is to help us, is to help us go there, you know,
so in that sense it seems like joyful effort, so it's only going to help us get there quickly and
with greater ease,
so maybe others have something to say about that, but...
Just two, I mean, how basically, you know, the three with discipline is, like Andrew mentioned too,
is how we're really looking at the law of cause and effect and cause, conditions, results of
suffering
and its causes of cessation and, you know, natural liberation and the path to realizing that is the
path,
and part of that is seeing, well, with our body, speech, and mind,
what are our activities of body, speech, and mind, you know, related to our suffering,
and how can we start to erode and wear down suffering for ourselves,
as well as the suffering we can create in auspicious conditions for ourselves and other beings in
our connections,
and we really can see to some degree our mistakes and recognize them and really see their results
to whatever degree we can,
I think we naturally don't enjoy seeing them at all, and then likewise the more we see our virtuous
qualities
and the virtuous qualities of others and virtuous activities of body, speech, and mind,
where, you know, there's less ignorance, where there's less aversion and anger and hatred,
where there's less, you know, attachment and jealousy and doubt and hesitation, just all these, you
know,
especially if we look at the three main poisons, you know, anger, attachment, you know, ignorance,
and then how they relate, so just two, so the cause is two for realizing more, you know, beneficial
and positive
and healing, nurturing, balancing activities we can do with our body, and, you know,
that are not only for ourselves but others, you know, through all the paramitas and so many levels
and things,
and then likewise with our speech to, like, have meaningful, kind, uplifting speeches,
I mean, again, we kind of naturally can reflect on that and see, to some degree, see how that's
nice, you know,
and then likewise the more, kind of, to whatever degree we can see more clearly and think more
clearly
and have an open mind and heart, you know, than that too, so I think the way joyful effort reflects
too
and we can really have some degree of seeing, oh, you know, this is going to, I can see how this is
nice
and natural and more balancing and I want to engage with this more, you know, and then likewise,
oh, this doesn't, this isn't good, you know, this doesn't taste good, this, like, I'm not happy,
others aren't happy,
it's causing such a mess, like, you know, so just that balance of being more aware of body, speech
and mind,
lessening that, you know, negative activities and states of mind as well as positive things,
I mean, just the way joyful effort reflects to that when we can really see and engage that way,
how discipline, again, Rinpoche has talked here, it's not about an outer, you know, police force or
getting too tight,
but really what's bringing more balance to our body, speech and mind and what's not only for
ourselves,
but other people and the environment and the world.
Just a quick question, I don't know how much time you have on this topic, but do you all think that
discipline could be also,
like, you could talk about it in terms of renunciation and/or is that maybe only a piece of it?
Like, you know, I was just thinking, like, with this definition from the Ceaseless Echoes about
being, you know,
rejecting negativity but then also accepting positive actions and then the third benefitting beings
,
I mean, in some ways I feel like from what I understand of renunciation that that is all of those
three things,
maybe highlighting the rejecting negative, but how do you think renunciation fits in?
I think particularly a lot of what Laya was just saying, it kept sparking my mind back to the four
thoughts that turned the mind,
a lot of that reflecting on not only the present circumstances but also what brought about those
present circumstances
and what was in those causes that created the peaceful or the joyful pieces of what's in our
current circumstances
but also at that same time what created the disharmonious and the suffering qualities of what's in
the present moment.
So I think, yeah, I agree, there's definitely a very close relation and particularly what Laya was
talking about,
that having that reflection on that really creates a lot of that joyful effort.
We're renouncing the causes of our suffering and the causes of other people's suffering
and then we're accepting the causes of our happiness and other people's happiness.
I mean, so definitely in that way, as for enunciation, it totally leads us to the path of Dharma,
that good activities lead to positive states of mind, that in a larger sense it reveals the natural
goodness qualities that are in our mind.
So it's connecting more directly with how our mind is when it's balanced or our primordial wisdom.
And then definitely in the context of joyful effort, I thought to mention, in addition to what Laya
was saying,
more in the Mahayana context of seeing joyful effort and discipline as the Paramitas,
as the second Paramita and the fourth Paramita,
that that joy largely comes from really being more and more and more concerned about other beings.
I think really that larger context, like Shanti Deva's famous for saying that all suffering comes
from desiring one's own happiness
and all happiness comes from desiring the happiness of others.
It's that ego clinging when it's only about us and our little box of concerns that really causes,
that it really squeezes out the joy that we can experience.
It's really being more concerned, more pervasively concerned about ourselves and others in this
larger view,
in a longer term view, that joy is really there.
I have a question, not to any particular one of these topics, but in general with the whole.
Because when you're talking about the Mahayana aspect of these, I was curious,
what framework do you believe that Rinpoche's were discussing these points in?
Because they didn't use a lot of vocabulary that would designate which particular yana it was a
part of.
I think particularly as we brought into the concepts and terms that we're talking about,
particularly looking at the Noble Eightfold Path, do you find it useful to bring in that Mahayana
aspect
when we're discussing these, and of course you do because you just said,
"How else could we look at these different points in the Mahayana view to bring out some more of
the meaning?"
I know during this past month-long retreat when Kevin Rinpoche was talking about the union of Maham
udranzochen,
he says in the Mahayana context they don't talk so much about the Noble Eightfold Path
because they do talk a lot about the three trainings, the training morality, concentration, and
wisdom,
which are the essence of the Noble Eightfold Path.
They're really the same because seeing the six Parmitas as being these three trainings,
it actually includes all of the Noble Eightfold Path in a larger view of being concerned about all
beings everywhere,
like it is in a larger context.
Talking about the three trainings is both the so-called Hinayana and the Mahayana discussion.
It's essential as the Noble Eightfold Path, it's the fourth Noble Truth, which is a core teaching
of Buddha in the first turning,
and that Hinayana teachings.
And then the six Parmitas, like the three trainings, can be said to be the six Parmitas,
and most of them is encompassing all six Parmitas.
While you were explaining that, I was thinking about that as well.
I mean, you can even relate them directly if you want to, just particular Parmitas.
But it is really kind of fascinating how they really do line up.
If you look at them side by side, it's very easy to see, "Oh yeah, it's just a different way of
explaining this really beautiful teaching."
And they talk about primordial wisdom in the chapter in several parts.
And primordial wisdom is generally Vajrayana, Yivu, or the Ati Zochen view.
It's primordial, it's not actually samsara, it isn't the actual nature, the nature is wisdom from
the beginning.
It's a prior teaching.
I thought maybe it's good, just with timing, to go on to this next point of concentration more
specifically.
And here in the chapter, which is first, they say discipline, body, speech, and mind is the basis,
and the next comes concentration, which means it deals more directly with the mind.
The discursive dualistic mind is always running around, running wild.
We only have to look to our own minds to see this,
and that mind always comes before the activities of our body and speech.
And so in order to develop concentration, we have to be our own teacher.
And of course we receive teachings and instructions on how to tame our body, speech, and mind,
but we're the only ones who actually can apply these instructions in our lives.
And that developing good concentration takes time.
We have to continually be mindful and apply the instructions properly with joyful effort.
But the more we practice properly with joyful effort,
the more we will reveal the hidden natural goodness qualities of our minds.
And that there are three experiences that can arise when we practice concentration techniques,
and they are bliss, clarity, and non-thought.
Remember Chai say bliss is healthy, and it reveals our inner qualities
as they pervade our mind and our entire body, regardless of the external circumstances.
And clarity is more the experience of when the mind is very clear and bright,
and we feel very light, and oftentimes many insights arise.
And that third experience of non-thought is when we remain undistracted by our thoughts,
that if thoughts do arise, they don't disturb us,
that we can intentionally remain in meditation without being distracted by thoughts
for longer and longer periods of time.
And while these three experiences of bliss, clarity, and non-thought
are natural results of concentration,
it's very, very important not to be attached to them,
and just to continue practicing according to the instructions.
And so that in this chapter is principally on this topic of concentration.
Does someone else want to read this second point here?
To discipline your mind and have concentration, you need to become your own teacher.
A skillful teacher can give guidelines and instructions to assist you,
but real discipline and concentration must come from yourself.
External supports or forces cannot subdue your mind and bring good concentration.
To develop discipline and concentration requires continual practice with joyfull, joyous effort.
Page 28.
Well, I have a question, and it had to do with the bliss, clarity, and non-thought.
Are they related to the three chiles?
I think they're said to be transformations of the three poisons.
And I think they're related to the three chiles too, they're talking about that way.
So non-thought is more related to the transforming ignorance.
Bliss is the transformation of attachment, and clarity is the transformation of anger.
And they really specifically say these are really natural qualities,
and they arise naturally.
And even in the nature of the mind, like, has these qualities naturally,
but it's the grasping, it's the problem.
So when we grasp to these qualities, then they become the poisons.
And when we don't grasp to these experiences of bliss, clarity, and non-thought,
they become just the natural expressions of how our mind and body are when they're balanced.
And so you could say more, I mean, I think it's related to that non-thought is more related to the
formless aspect of our mind.
So that's more dharmakaya.
And then I think the bliss is always more related with the sambhoka kaya, the bliss emptiness.
And then the more arising kind of outreaching qualities of mind or activities is more related with
that clarity,
the more distilled or crystallized expressions of mind, which is more related with that clarity.
Would that be dharmakaya?
Yeah, so dharmakaya.
So how about concentration itself?
I mean, how could we wrap up? What is concentration?
How do we concentrate, like within the Buddhist terms on the Buddhist path?
Well, I like this sentence on page 27.
It's just right as Rinpoche started talking about concentration on page 27, this fourth paragraph,
saying that, "Until we develop good concentration, we will remain on the surface of the mind
without discovering its deeper wisdom."
I really like that sentence because it shows how these three trainings relate to each other,
that discipline is really where we start, we prepare the ground, we determine our destination,
and then concentration is really where we begin to really move inward.
I mean, it's really where we stop and start to really look inward at the mind.
And then it progresses inward, and we'll talk about wisdom more in a minute,
but that's just like the deepest, so kind of like starting out here in a more outer way with our
discipline in conduct,
and concentration is where we really start, we settle our minds.
And there's a lot of different types of concentration practices,
but it's really like just how we begin moving inward.
Can you say here that discipline, like just related with what you said,
discipline is much more related with body and speech,
and then concentrations related with mind, but what part of mind?
The discursive, dualistic, conceptualizing part of mind, so lessening that, taming that,
and that wisdom, the third, is more related to the non-conceptual wisdom aspect of our mind,
or the primordial wisdom of our mind.
So it is that progression of deepening from the more outer, apparent level,
to the more inner, all-pervasive, natural way of how the mind is.
And Kemper Rinpoche specifically was talking about that in the
"Mountain of Treat" instructions of his sonus, teacher Rinpoche, two years ago, in those
instructions.
I was going to say, so basically could we say, I mean if we look at like meditation,
it seems like that's kind of definitely something involved with concentration.
Of course we need to concentrate to do any activity,
but especially if we're working with our mind, concentration.
So then, I mean, again, just kind of remembering.
Rinpoche's talk more later in the book, but just how that relates to, like,
shamatha meditation and vipassana, or how that, especially shamatha,
it seems, a calm, abiding meditation results, is an embodiment or a method
of actually applying concentration.
So what types of shamatha are there? There's two types.
There's two types of shamatha. There's with an object and without an object.
So what's with an object? What's the example?
With an object would be if you have a beautiful image of the Buddha,
and you're going to focus right on the Buddha's third eye.
And that's just an example. Or anything, a beautiful flower
or something that catches your eye, meaning the instructions.
What's without object?
Without object could be visualizing. But when we're just imagining or visualizing,
seeing something, seeing the third eye of the Buddha,
and then there's also just completely formless,
kind of just, oh, where the object is maybe awareness itself.
We're holding something in mind, but it's very subtle,
and it might not be an apparent object, but our mind is still holding an object.
I did have a question that comes to concentration too.
Why, you started to talk about this when you're going to elaborate on it a little bit.
Particularly when we're talking about the shamatha and the vipassana,
particularly since the first is more of that just concentrating on what's there,
and then the vipassana being how you cut through it
and seeing that it's not the way that you habitually held it to be.
Would vipassana then go more into the wisdom qualities
that we're talking about in the third point coming up,
or does that still fall more into concentration?
Or is it that vipassana gives rise to the wisdom?
Vipassana is the wisdom. So a shamatha or concentration is we're holding something in mind,
either an outer object or we're holding onto an inner object,
something that we're visualizing or space, for example.
But regardless, the mind is holding onto something.
There's a sense of self holding onto what is not self, an object.
Then the wisdom or the vipassana, the supreme or extraordinary insight
or seeing, extraordinary seeing, is in that type of technique,
the mind isn't holding anything.
The mind is just releasing all holding, all grasping,
and trying to naturally recognize and abide in how the mind is
when it's not grasping onto anything.
And they say when the mind is doing that,
what it's doing is recognizing its primordial wisdom
and sustaining that recognition. So that's vipassana,
so that's the third part of the wisdom training.
Supreme seeing, that's the translation of vipassana.
And isn't it when you do some analysis, like you turn the mind,
you say you look at the mind and ask what is it or what color is it?
Isn't that vipassana?
It can be. I think there's styles of vipassana,
once a more deductive or inferential style, where you ask an analytic,
it's like analytic meditation, you intentionally ask a conceptual question
to lead to a non-conceptual recognition
of how your mind is when it's not holding onto any question.
You ask a question to your mind and the answer is not holding onto an answer.
I mean, vipassana like that.
But then just to directly look, like without kind of trying to conceptualize it,
then that's like more of a direct technique for vipassana.
Do these three trainings necessarily build on each other?
Like, do you see that you need to have a foundation of discipline
before you can really begin to have concentration?
You really need to have that foundation of discipline and concentration
before you have that practice of wisdom.
Or is it that they grow altogether?
I think it's both.
But the foundation is discipline and ethical conduct.
Without that, you don't have anything at all.
You have your normal, ordinary, wild, outrageous habit patterns.
That's what you have.
So to think that you really have concentration or some kind of stabilized way.
I mean, it's a dynamic thing, like say the three vowels.
The outer vowels are the Vinaya and then the Bodhisattva vowels
and then the Tantric Samayas or the Tantric vowels.
And how one is related more with conduct on the outer level.
The other one is related more with maintaining compassion for all beings
and cultivating that and not doing others wrong or yourself.
And then the Vajrayana is really related with wisdom,
maintaining pure perception, maintaining the view.
They're all totally based on each other.
Maybe if this is the foundation and this envelops concentration,
which envelops wisdom, but they're all just like,
I think as your concentration gets better,
your discipline gets better, your wisdom gets better.
As your wisdom gets better, your discipline gets better,
your concentration gets better.
But at the same time, you're also saying that one can't skip the discipline
and just go straight to, "Oh, I'm wise!"
And practicing wisdom without taking that time to relate to the mind
in a way that's disciplined.
This is something that comes up a lot in the Vajrayana.
There's also that aspect of, I mean, should we go to wisdom?
Because I think we only have like five minutes or something, but...
Sorry.
If we get there, I mean...
So I'll just do a quick version.
It says in the chapter, which is based on discipline and concentration,
we develop wisdom.
Wisdom is fresh, complete, and free of all grasping and confusion.
It's a direct experience of the primordial nature of the mind.
All sentient beings in Buddha share the same nature of mind,
this primordial wisdom or Buddha nature.
It's always there, but it's only temporarily covered up
by our negative habits, obscurations, and grasping.
And though we already have this primordial wisdom nature of our mind,
we have to reveal it by removing our grasping.
So on the path, the most important thing is to work directly with our mind.
And then the best way to work with our mind
is with these three trainings of discipline, concentration, and wisdom.
So now if we highlight this wisdom,
maybe we talk about wisdom instead of reading this topic.
So that third topic point is on page 32nd and 4th full paragraphs,
but maybe we'll go directly into wisdom.
So what is the wisdom?
I think we could look at wisdom. There's conceptual, right?
There's actually, even just hearing the teachings is bringing us wisdom.
And then there's when we are studying and discussing and contemplating,
thinking about the teachings.
That's another aspect of absorbing the wisdom even a little more.
And then there's the non-conceptual wisdom,
what we're really unveiling through our hearing and studying
and contemplating and practicing,
which brings out the real primordial wisdom.
So I thought those basic frames as far as how we could relate to wisdom in that.
So it's called the three wisdoms, wisdom of study,
wisdom of contemplation, and the wisdom of meditation.
It seems here particularly, when I'm looking through the writing of Rinpoche,
it seems like they're referencing primordial wisdom here as well,
particularly when I'm looking at the definitions of wisdom,
or at least the way they talk about it here.
Wisdom is not something we can obtain from outside ourselves
that has been with us from beginningless times.
So I think here it definitely seems like they're talking about the primordial wisdom.
And then I guess a question from that then.
So when we're talking about these three trainings of discipline, concentration, and wisdom,
and the way that Kempos seem to be particularly discussing primordial wisdom,
do the other pieces of wisdom fit in with these three trainings then?
Or how is it that they would fit into the concentration and the discipline,
particularly when we're talking about the wisdom of study or the wisdom of contemplation?
My understanding is that that is wisdom.
That's part of what we're doing here.
When we're listening to the teachings and thinking about them a little bit
and seeing how they relate to and absorbing them, that's an aspect of wisdom.
And then when we move deeper with actually applying and absorbing
so that we're revealing that aspect of revealing our Buddha nature
or any wisdom, primordial wisdom is there.
I could be wrong, but my understanding is that those three wisdoms can really fall underneath this.
And of course that relates to the teachings involved, all these other things,
but maybe especially the abhidhana, or the pure potential is also that aspect of the teachings
themselves.
But even if we look on the levels of the Four Noble Truths or something,
we could see there's wisdom there, and then how do we apply them?
So they work together for sure.
That means creating causes and conditions for accumulating our merit
and kind of positive environments and positive conditions for revealing and unveiling,
purifying our obscurations and revealing and ripening our primordial wisdom.
And they're definitely directly related with each other.
It's a complicated answer.
They say with Buddhist teachings there's two lineages, lineage of study, lineage of practice.
So lineage of study is essentially tripitika, vinaya, sutra, abhidharma.
Lineage of practice is the three trainings, discipline, concentration, and meditation, or wisdom.
So in order to do anything, whether we study or practice,
we have to receive some kind of a teaching to actually start to investigate it.
So all these tripitika ways of intellectually, conceptually,
investigating, receiving instructions and teachings, and then starting to contemplate them,
really think about them, see if it's true or not, and our own experience, testing them out.
And that is the wisdom component of practice, having our conceptual mind engage with it,
so that then when we apply it with the discipline,
and then we apply it better, more directly to our mind,
based on that foundation of tamed body and speech,
and we go directly to our mind, working with these rough negative emotions and habits,
then what are we applying the instructions that we receive through our study,
and then that we're trying to contemplate intellectually with our contemplation.
But then when really applying them in practice,
then this really has to do with these three trainings,
and then the most direct way of applying them is that third wisdom,
the wisdom that's non-conceptual beyond all grasping,
or the wisdom of meditation, where we directly apply that in our practice,
which, as Andrew said, then re-informs all of the other things we do.
If we can recognize primordial wisdom, then do that as we're engaging with our body in speech,
or as we're holding the object in mind, or as we're studying, then everything becomes a meditation.
So from that third wisdom, that's where we're trying to go to.
Everything in Buddha's teaching is oriented towards a view of non-grasping wisdom awareness of prim
ordial nature.
It all leads there.
Then once we arrive there, then the whole thing is to actually refine that,
have that come out more and more, like have our body and speech in mind more and more,
always be in that state of balanced awareness, without any error or any grasping.
Just one tiny little thing I want to say, just in that same vein.
It's just so beautiful, this line on the very second to last paragraph,
very simple but so profound, just that this line that the primordial, sorry, page 30,
"Although ignorance and obscurations cover our wisdom, the primordial nature is always radiating."
So really it's just even that the primordial nature is always radiating, always.
So it's like, that's the wisdom component right there, that it's like you all were saying,
all these teachings are leading to whatever helps us be able to see that these qualities are always
there.
So I mean, that seems to me why, like what you said when I was like,
it doesn't really matter which teaching it is that you're connecting to on a certain level,
because it's always there.
So whatever kind of like ushers that, kind of, to see that, connect to that.
I thought there were two quick points.
All of this requires joyful effort, again, again, again, whether it's study or practice,
whether it's any of the three trainings, we have to keep engaging it,
that otherwise we won't achieve our result.
They said that, Rinpoche said that very many times in this chapter,
and we see that in our experience, we keep having to re-engage it joyfully as much as we can,
with a view of all beings in mind.
And then secondly, I think the second wisdom of contemplation is so critical,
and oftentimes we can skip it.
We just can receive a lot of teachings, we don't really investigate them,
we don't really review the notes, we don't really try to put it into practice so much.
And then ten years later, we wonder why more change didn't happen.
That contemplating, that really personally engaging the teachings,
thinking about it, applying it, coming after we practice it, then reviewing it again,
that that's really key, that contemplation, wisdom,
is so key with having our study be effective and having our practice be productive.
Just thought I'd mention that.
On that point, I know we're out of time, but I have...
Wisdom, we shouldn't think that it's just some far-off thing that's very technical
and very far down the path.
Anytime we realize something about our mind or our habit patterns or our conduct,
we learn something, we learn something true.
Anytime that we realize something true, closer to the way things are,
that leads us towards our destination, that is wisdom.
I mean, it's a smaller wisdom, maybe, than a big something else, but it's important to...
And how that relates to what Drop was saying with conceptual accuracy or what's working.
And then, of course, there's the non-dual, non-conceptual, ever-present wisdom
we're trying to unveil through connecting with that analytic and accurate perception
and conception.
And, of course, there's so much more to say,
and everyone, we can stop talking now, and everyone else can enjoy their study time together.
So we'll dedicate the merit briefly.
(Singing in foreign language)